Draft: Provide initialization documentation for cloning Dandi ecosystem (#104)
dandi/handbook: docs/59_overview.md

# Overview and Architecture

The series of docs in this directory define how to create your own DANDI ecosystem (i.e. a clone of the entire DANDI ecosystem).
It is suggested that you briefly read through each of the documents in this guide before starting.

This section provides a high-level view of how DANDI’s core components fit together in a typical “full stack” deployment.

## The Big Picture

The DANDI platform is essentially composed of:

1. **Storage**: S3 buckets (AWS) where data actually resides.

> 2. **API**: A Django/Girder-based backend application (hosted on Heroku) that handles the DANDI data model, user authentication, and orchestrates S3 interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **API**: A Django/Resonant-based backend application (hosted on Heroku) that handles the DANDI data model, user authentication, and orchestrates S3 interactions.
```

3. **Frontend**: A Vue-based web application (hosted on Netlify) for users to browse, search, and manage data in the archive.
4. **Workers**: Celery workers (also on Heroku) for asynchronous tasks such as file checksum calculations, analytics, and housekeeping.

> 5. **Observability**: Log aggregation and alerting (Heroku logs, optional additional logs), plus Sentry for error-tracking and notifications. TODO(asmacdo) verify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Observability**: Log aggregation and alerting (Heroku logs, optional additional logs), plus Sentry for error-tracking and notifications.
```

Reviewer: @asmacdo

> 6. **Infrastructure-As-Code**: Terraform scripts that glue everything together—AWS S3 resources, Netlify or domain DNS, Heroku apps, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Infrastructure-As-Code**: Terraform scripts that glue everything together—AWS S3 resources, Netlify for DNS, Heroku apps, etc.
```

Reviewer 2: i don't think we use netlify for DNS. the DNS routes are still in AWS Route53.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. **Infrastructure-As-Code**: Terraform scripts that glue everything together.
```
Lets just keep it simple :)

Reviewer: Hi @satra, both LINC and DANDI use Netlify for DNS management for the apex and `www` domains.

Reviewer 2: all routes that i can see on the console go through AWS DNS servers for the apex and all the subdomains, including `A` and `www`. try `dig +trace dandiarchive.org` (same for lincbrain)

so i don't know what management with netlify means in this particular case.

Reviewer 4: I would keep it simple but not as simple as @asmacdo 

```suggestion
6. **Infrastructure-As-Code**: Terraform scripts that glue everything together—AWS (S3, Route53, etc), Netlify, Heroku, etc.
```

to at least hint on what is there to glue

Reviewer: @satra I was mistaken.  You are correct.  DNS is managed through Route 53.

* The **Web UI** calls into the **API** (over HTTPS).
* The **API** queries or updates metadata in its Postgres DB (hosted on Heroku).
* The **API** calls AWS S3 to read/write DANDI assets.
* Certain heavy-lift or background tasks get queued into Celery tasks, handled by the **Workers**.
* Domain names, certificates, and load-balancing records are handled by AWS Route 53 or Netlify’s DNS, depending on whether it’s the API subdomain or the apex domain for the UI.
* Large chunks of data can be streamed from S3 directly to the Client via presigned URLs

## Key Components

<img
src="../img/deployment.png"
alt="dandi_deployment"
style="width: 90%; height: auto; display: block; margin-left: auto;  margin-right: auto;"/>

### 1. AWS S3 Storage

* **Primary Storage**: S3 buckets are the primary storage of the data (Zarr, NWB, etc.).
* **Configured via terraform**: Bucket creation, IAM policies, route to logs, etc., are specified in `terraform/*.tf`.
Provides storage buckets, as well as domain management, for resources across the DANDI ecosystem 

### 2. Heroku

Provisions the servers, worker processes, and the database for the API.

> 1. **API**: Django, extended by Girder 4, provides REST endpoints for metadata, asset management, versioning, and authentication.

Reviewer: Recent update.

```suggestion
1. **API**: Django, extended by [Resonant](https://github.com/kitware-resonant/terraform-heroku-resonant), provides REST endpoints for metadata, asset management, versioning, and authentication.
```

2. **Postgres**: Stores user metadata, dandiset metadata, and references to S3 objects.
3. **Workers (Celery)**: Offload long-running tasks (checksums, analytics, zarr validation, etc.).

### 3. Netlify (UI)

* **Frontend server**: Serves a static build of the DANDI Archive frontend (Vue.js).
* **Autodeployment**: On each push or merge to `main` (or whichever branch is configured), Netlify automatically builds and deploys.
* **Configuration**:
  - **`netlify.toml`**: Describes build commands, environment variables for staging vs. production.
  - **`.env.production`**: Holds the environment variables for the Vue-based app at runtime (e.g. `VITE_API_URL`, `VITE_SENTRY_DSN`).

### 4. Terraform Infrastructure

The single source of truth for spinning up or tearing down resources such as S3 buckets, IAM users, Route 53 DNS, Heroku pipeline config, Netlify domain config, etc.

* **Repo**: The [`dandi-infrastructure`](https://github.com/dandi/dandi-infrastructure) repo.

> * **Terraform Cloud**: Used to run or apply changes after you push commits to the infrastructure repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Terraform Cloud**: Used to plan or apply changes after you push commits to the infrastructure repo.
```
